Skip directly to A to Z listSkip directly to navigationSkip directly to page optionsSkip directly to site content
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People Search Form Controls

Submit

SEARCH
Search The CDC
CDC A-Z INDEX 
Influenza (Flu)

Seasonal Influenza (Flu)
About Fluexpand
Flu Seasonexpand
Prevent Fluexpand
Symptoms & Diagnosis collapse
Flu Symptoms
Flu Complicationsexpand
The Difference Between Cold and Flu
Diagnosis
Treatmentexpand
Schools, Businesses & Travelersexpand
Flu Activity & Surveillanceexpand
FluVaxViewexpand
Health Professionalsexpand
International Workexpand
Flu News & Spotlightsexpand
Get Email Updates

To receive weekly email updates about Seasonal Flu, enter your email address:


Enter Email Address
What's this? Submit
Influenza Types

Seasonal Avian Swine/Variant Pandemic Other
Seasonal Influenza (Flu)Symptoms & Diagnosis
Flu Symptoms & Complications
Language:English (US)
Español
Recommend on FacebookTweetShare
What are the signs and symptoms of the flu?


Questions

What is influenza?
When is the flu season?
What is the treatment?
Flu vs Cold

Signs and Symptoms	Influenza	Cold
Symptom onset	Abrupt	Gradual
Fever	Usual; lasts 3-4 days	Rare
Aches	Usual; often severe	Slight
Chills	Fairly common	Uncommon
Fatigue, weakness	Usual	Sometimes
Sneezing	Sometimes	Common
Stuffy nose	Sometimes	Common
Sore throat	Sometimes	Common
Chest discomfort, cough	Common; can be severe	Mild to moderate; hacking cough
Headache	Common	Rare
Flu Symptoms

Influenza (also known as the flu) is a contagious respiratory illness caused by flu viruses. It can cause mild to severe illness, and at times can lead to death. The flu is different from a cold. The flu usually comes on suddenly. People who have the flu often feel some or all of these symptoms:

Fever* or feeling feverish/chills
Cough
Sore throat
Runny or stuffy nose
Muscle or body aches
Headaches
Fatigue (tiredness)
Some people may have vomiting and diarrhea, though this is more common in children than adults.
* It’s important to note that not everyone with flu will have a fever.

Flu Complications

Most people who get influenza will recover in a few days to less than two weeks, but some people will develop complications (such as pneumonia) as a result of the flu, some of which can be life-threatening and result in death.

Pneumonia, bronchitis, sinus and ear infections are examples of complications from flu. The flu can make chronic health problems worse. For example, people with asthma may experience asthma attacks while they have the flu, and people with chronic congestive heart failure may experience worsening of this condition that is triggered by the flu.

People at High Risk from Flu

Anyone can get the flu (even healthy people), and serious problems related to the flu can happen at any age, but some people are at high risk of developing serious flu-related complications if they get sick. This includes people 65 years and older, people of any age with certain chronic medical conditions (such as asthma, diabetes, or heart disease), pregnant women, and young children.

What are the emergency warning signs of flu sickness?

In children

Fast breathing or trouble breathing
Bluish skin color
Not drinking enough fluids
Not waking up or not interacting
Being so irritable that the child does not want to be held
Flu-like symptoms improve but then return with fever and worse cough
Fever with a rash
In adults

Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
Pain or pressure in the chest or abdomen
Sudden dizziness
Confusion
Severe or persistent vomiting
Flu-like symptoms that improve but then return with fever and worse cough
In addition to the signs above, get medical help right away for any infant who has any of these signs:

Being unable to eat
Has trouble breathing
Has no tears when crying
Significantly fewer wet diapers than normal
Digital Resources

Flu Guide for Parents
The Flu: A Guide For ParentsDownload the PDF

How to Know if You Have the Flu: Flu Symptoms
Video: Flu SymptomsWatch the video

Do your part to stop the spread of flu
Video: Do your part to help slow the spread of fluWatch the video

Fighting Flu
Video: Fighting the FluWatch the video

Page last reviewed: October 20, 2017
Page last updated: July 28, 2017
Content source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD)
Page maintained by: Office of the Associate Director for Communication, Digital Media Branch, Division of Public Affairs
Email
 
Recommend
 
Tweet
 
YouTube
 
Instagram
 
Listen
 
Watch
 
RSS
About CDC Jobs Funding
 
Policies Privacy FOIA No Fear Act OIG
1600 Clifton Road Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 USA 
800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636), TTY: 888-232-6348
Email CDC-INFO
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services 
HHS/Open 
USA.s