 NEWSLETTER
HealthLine

ADVERTISEMENT

Early Flu Symptoms
1. Fatigue 2. Body aches and chills 3. Cough 4. Sore throat 5. Fever 6. Gastrointestinal problems Symptoms in children Emergency symptoms Recovery period Protect yourself Prevention
Overview
Detecting early symptoms of the flu can prevent the spread of the virus and possibly help you treat the illness before it gets worse. Early symptoms can include:

fatigue
body aches and chills
cough
sore throat
fever
gastrointestinal problems
There are also early flu symptoms that are unique to children.

Read on to learn more about all of these symptoms and how you can find relief.

1. FATIGUE

Sudden or excessive fatigue
Shorter days and reduced sunlight can make you feel tired, but there’s a difference between being tired and experiencing extreme fatigue. Sudden, excessive fatigue is one of the earliest signs of the flu, and it may appear before other symptoms. Fatigue is also a symptom of the common cold, but it’s usually more severe with the flu. Extreme weakness and tiredness may interfere with your normal activities, so it’s important that you limit activity and allow your body to rest. Take a few days off from work or school and stay in bed. Rest can strengthen your immune system and help you fight the virus.

2. BODY ACHES AND CHILLS

Body aches and chills
Body aches and chills are also common flu symptoms. If you’re coming down with the flu virus, you may mistakenly blame body aches on something else, such as a recent workout. Body aches can manifest anywhere in the body, especially in the head, back, and legs. Chills may also accompany body aches and the flu may cause chills even before a fever develops. Wrapping yourself in a warm blanket can increase your body temperature and reduce chills. If you have body aches, you can take over-the-counter pain medication, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin).

ADVERTISEMENT

3. COUGH

Cough
A persistent cough can indicate an early illness and it may be a warning sign of the flu. The flu virus can also cause a cough with wheezing and chest tightness. You might cough up phlegm or mucus, but this is rare in the early stages of the flu.

If you have respiratory problems, such as asthma or emphysema, you may need to consult a doctor to prevent further complications. Also, call a doctor if you notice colored phlegm. Flu complications can include bronchitis and pneumonia. Take cough drops or cough medicine to calm a cough. It can also help to keep yourself and your throat hydrated with lots of water and caffeine-free teas. Always cover your cough to prevent spreading the infection.

Read more: Natural remedies for sore throat »

4. SORE THROAT

Sore throat
Flu-related coughing can quickly lead to a sore throat. Some viruses can actually cause a swollen throat without a cough. In the earliest stages of the flu, your throat may feel scratchy and irritated. You may also feel a strange sensation when you swallow food or drinks. If you have a sore throat, it will likely get worse as the virus progresses. Stock up on caffeine-free tea, chicken soup, and water. You can also gargle with 8 oz. of warm water, 1 tsp. of salt, and 1/2 tsp. of baking soda.

SPONSORED HEALTH SOLUTIONS
Video chat with a doctor about your cold from home.
Find a telehealth provider licensed in your area


Enter your zip code
FIND A DOCTOR
5. FEVER

Fever
A fever is a sign that your body is fighting off an infection. Flu-related fevers are typically 100˚F (38˚C) or higher. While a fever is a common symptom in early stages of the flu, not everyone with the flu will have a fever. Also, you might experience chills with or without a fever while the virus runs its course. Acetaminophen and ibuprofen are both effective fever reducers, but these medicines can’t cure the virus.

ADVERTISEMENT

6. GASTROINTESTINAL PROBLEMS

Gastrointestinal problems
Early flu symptoms can extend below the head, throat, and chest. Some strains of the virus can cause diarrhea, nausea, stomach pain, or vomiting. Dehydration is a dangerous complication of diarrhea and vomiting. To avoid dehydration, drink sports drinks, fruit juices, caffeine-free teas and sodas, or broth.

SYMPTOMS IN CHILDREN

Flu symptoms in children
The flu virus also causes the above symptoms in children. However, your child may have other symptoms that require medical attention. These can include:

not drinking enough fluids
crying with no tears
not waking up or interacting
being unable to eat
having fever with a rash
having difficulty urinating
It can be hard to know the difference between the flu and a cold in children. With both a cold and flu, your child can develop a cough, sore throat, and body aches, but symptoms are more severe with the flu. If your child doesn’t have a fever, it may be an indication that they have a cold instead. If you’re concerned about any symptoms your child has developed, you should call their pediatrician.

EMERGENCY SYMPTOMS

Emergency symptoms
The flu is a progressive illness. This means that symptoms will worsen before they get better. Not everyone responds the same to a virus. Your overall health can determine the severity of your symptoms. The flu virus can be mild or severe. Seek immediate medical care if you have the following symptoms:

chest pain
breathing difficulties
bluish skin and lips
severe dehydration
dizziness and confusion
recurring fever
worsening cough
ADVERTISEMENT
RECOVERY PERIOD

Recovery period
If you’ve been diagnosed with the flu, allow yourself a reasonable recovery period. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend that you don’t go back to work until you’ve been fever-free for 24 hours without medication. Even if you don’t have a fever, you should still consider staying home until other symptoms improve. It’s safe to return to work or school when you can resume normal activity without getting tired. The recovery rate varies. Even after feeling better, you might experience a lingering cough and fatigue for a few weeks. Always see a doctor if the flu comes back or gets worse after an initial recovery.

Read more: Am I too sick or contagious to go to work? »

PROTECT YOURSELF

Protect yourself
During flu season, protecting yourself from viruses is a top priority. The flu virus can spread through saliva droplets that are projected when an infected person coughs or sneezes. These droplets can reach people and surfaces up to 6 feet away. You can be exposed by breathing air containing these droplets or by touching objects that these droplets have landed on.

PREVENTION

Prevention
The good news is that the flu virus is preventable. Getting a flu shot every year is one of the best ways to protect yourself. The flu shot is recommended for everyone ages 6 months and older, including pregnant women. According the CDC, the nasal spray flu vaccine should not be used during 2016–2017. Other preventive measures include:

avoid close contact with sick people
stay home if you’re sick, especially if you have a fever
cover your cough to protect others
wash your hands
limit how frequently you touch your mouth or nose
Article resources
FEEDBACK:
 	Medically Reviewed by Graham Rogers, MD on April 17, 2017 — Written by Kristeen Cherney and Valencia Higuera
ADVERTISEMENT

top stories

CANCER
Good News, Bad News on Breast Cancer Survival Rates

GENERAL HEALTH
'Water Cremation' Becoming More Popular

ANTIBIOTICS
What You Should Eat During and After Antibiotics


MENTAL HEALTH
What Exactly Is Borderline Personality Disorder?
ADVERTISEMENT
sponsored by wolf kitchen

Know going in how the dish will come out.
See More
ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT
READ MORE
ADVERTISEMENT

Am I Too Sick or Contagious to Go to Work?
Taking sick time isn't easy, but you don't want to infect co-workers. Read on to determine when you should stay...
READ MORE 
     

Recognizing Flu Symptoms
The flu's common symptoms of fever, body aches, and fatigue can leave many confined to bed. Luckily, symptoms...
READ MORE 
ADVERTISEMENT

Everything You Need to Know About the Flu
The flu and the common cold may seem very similar at first. Here's what you need to know to correctly identify the...
READ MORE 
     

Cold or Flu? How to Know Which One You Have
It's not always easy to determine if you have a cold or the flu, but knowing the differences helps treatment work...
READ MORE 
ADVERTISEMENT

Can You Have the Flu Without a Fever?
A fever is a common symptom of the flu virus, but not everyone who gets the flu will have one. Learn more.
READ MORE 
     

Stock Up! 8 Products You Should Have on Hand for Flu Season
Here are eight products to help prevent you from getting sick and also to help you feel better if you come down...
READ MORE 
ADVERTISEMENT

11 Cold and Flu Home Remedies
READ MORE 
     

How to Use Essential Oils for the Flu
Looking for a natural remedy for the flu? We'll show you 10 essential oils that can fight the flu and how to use...
READ MORE 
ADVERTISEMENT

Quick Tips for Treating Kids with a Cold or Flu
Colds and flus are viral infections, so antibiotics won't cure them. However, there are steps you can take to help...
READ MORE 
     

15 Foods That Boost the Immune System
Include the following 15 immune system boosters in your recipes and meal planning, and you'll help your family...
READ MORE 
ADVERTISEMENT

 
 HealthLine
   
About Us
Health Topics
Health News
FDA
Contact Us
Advertise With Us
Advertising Policy
Newsletters
Careers
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Find an Online Doctor
get our newsletter
Health tips, wellness advice and more.

Enter your email
SUBSCRIBE
 This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to verify.	 TRUSTe
Copyright © 2005 - 2017 Healthline Media. All rights reserved. Our content does not constitute a medical consultation. See a certified medical professional for diagnosis. Privacy Policy

