Mayo Clinic
MENU

Search Mayo Clinic
  
Twitter
Facebook
Google
YouTube
Pinterest
Request an Appointment
Find a Doctor
Find a Job
Give Now
Log in to Patient Account
English
Request an Appointment
Patient Care & Health Information
Diseases & Conditions
Influenza (flu)
Symptoms & causes
Diagnosis & treatment
Print
Overview

Influenza is a viral infection that attacks your respiratory system — your nose, throat and lungs. Influenza, commonly called the flu, is not the same as stomach "flu" viruses that cause diarrhea and vomiting.

For most people, influenza resolves on its own. But sometimes, influenza and its complications can be deadly. People at higher risk of developing flu complications include:

Young children under 5, and especially those under 2 years
Adults older than 65
Residents of nursing homes and other long-term care facilities
Pregnant women and women up to two weeks postpartum
People with weakened immune systems
People who have chronic illnesses, such as asthma, heart disease, kidney disease and diabetes
People who are very obese, with a body mass index (BMI) of 40 or higher
Your best defense against influenza is to receive an annual vaccination.

Symptoms

Initially, the flu may seem like a common cold with a runny nose, sneezing and sore throat. But colds usually develop slowly, whereas the flu tends to come on suddenly. And although a cold can be a nuisance, you usually feel much worse with the flu.

Common signs and symptoms of the flu include:

Fever over 100.4 F (38 C)
Aching muscles, especially in your back, arms and legs
Chills and sweats
Headache
Dry, persistent cough
Fatigue and weakness
Nasal congestion
Sore throat
When to see a doctor

Most people who get the flu can treat themselves at home and often don't need to see a doctor.

If you have flu symptoms and are at risk of complications, see your doctor right away. Taking antiviral drugs within the first 48 hours after you first notice symptoms may reduce the length of your illness and help prevent more-serious problems.

Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic
Causes

Flu viruses travel through the air in droplets when someone with the infection coughs, sneezes or talks. You can inhale the droplets directly, or you can pick up the germs from an object — such as a telephone or computer keyboard — and then transfer them to your eyes, nose or mouth.

People with the virus are likely contagious from the day or so before symptoms first appear until about five days after symptoms begin, though sometimes people are contagious for as long as 10 days after symptoms appear. Children and people with weakened immune systems may be contagious for a slightly longer time.

Influenza viruses are constantly changing, with new strains appearing regularly. If you've had influenza in the past, your body has already made antibodies to fight that particular strain of the virus. If future influenza viruses are similar to those you've encountered before, either by having the disease or by vaccination, those antibodies may prevent infection or lessen its severity.

But antibodies against flu viruses you've encountered in the past can't protect you from new influenza subtypes that can be very different immunologically from what you had before.

Risk factors

Factors that may increase your risk of developing influenza or its complications include:

Age. Seasonal influenza tends to target young children and older adults.
Living or working conditions. People who live or work in facilities along with many other residents, such as nursing homes or military barracks, are more likely to develop influenza.
Weakened immune system. Cancer treatments, anti-rejection drugs, corticosteroids and HIV/AIDS can weaken your immune system. This can make it easier for you to catch influenza and may also increase your risk of developing complications.
Chronic illnesses. Chronic conditions, such as asthma, diabetes or heart problems, may increase your risk of influenza complications.
Pregnancy. Pregnant women are more likely to develop influenza complications, particularly in the second and third trimesters. Women who are two weeks postpartum are also more likely to develop influenza-related complications.
Obesity. People with a BMI of 40 or more have an increased risk of complications from the flu.
Complications

If you're young and healthy, seasonal influenza usually isn't serious. Although you may feel miserable while you have it, the flu usually goes away in a week or two with no lasting effects. But high-risk children and adults may develop complications such as:

Pneumonia
Bronchitis
Asthma flare-ups
Heart problems
Ear infections
Pneumonia is the most serious complication. For older adults and people with a chronic illness, pneumonia can be deadly.

Prevention

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends annual flu vaccination for everyone over the age of 6 months.

Each year's seasonal flu vaccine contains protection from the three or four influenza viruses that are expected to be the most common during that year's flu season. The vaccine is currently available as an injection only. The CDC no longer recommends nasal spray flu vaccinations because during recent flu seasons, the spray has been relatively ineffective.

Controlling the spread of infection

The influenza vaccine isn't 100 percent effective, so it's also important to take measures such as these to reduce the spread of infection:

Wash your hands. Thorough and frequent hand-washing is an effective way to prevent many common infections. Or use alcohol-based hand sanitizers if soap and water aren't readily available.
Contain your coughs and sneezes. Cover your mouth and nose when you sneeze or cough. To avoid contaminating your hands, cough or sneeze into a tissue or into the inner crook of your elbow.
Avoid crowds. Flu spreads easily wherever people congregate — in child care centers, schools, office buildings, auditoriums and public transportation. By avoiding crowds during peak flu season, you reduce your chances of infection. And, if you're sick, stay home for at least 24 hours after your fever subsides so that you lessen your chance of infecting others.
By Mayo Clinic Staff
Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic
Diagnosis & treatment
Oct. 05, 2017
Print Share on: FacebookTwitter
References
Related
Fluzone High-Dose: What distinguishes it from other flu vaccines?
Flu: When to see a doctor?
Flu germs: How long can they live outside the body?
Flu shots
School health tips
Flu Shot Prevents Heart Attack
Fever treatment guide
Vaccines for adults
What is MERS-CoV, and what should I do?
Nasal Cleaning
Hand-washing tips
Primary immunodeficiency and immunization
Flu and pregnancy
Breast-feeding and medications
Flu and Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS)
He's the bravest kid I've ever seen
When to Take Your Child to the E.D.
Muscle pain
Leg pain
Arm pain
Headache
Nasal congestion
Fatigue
Cough
Runny nose
Back pain
Influenza (flu)
Symptoms & causes
Diagnosis & treatment
Advertisement


Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.

Advertising & Sponsorship
PolicyOpportunitiesAd Choices
Mayo Clinic Store

Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic.
4 Simple Steps to a Joy-Filled Life
NEW! Mayo Clinic Guide to Integrative Medicine
Stop Osteoporosis in its Tracks
Mayo Clinic on Healthy Aging
The Mayo Clinic Diet Online

CON-20164014
Patient Care & Health Information
Diseases & Conditions
Influenza (flu)
Mayo Clinic
Request AppointmentContact UsAbout Mayo ClinicEmployeesFind a JobSite MapAbout This Site
Twitter
Facebook
Google
YouTube
Pinterest
Mayo Clinic is a not-for-profit organization. Make a donation.
PATIENT CARE & HEALTH INFO
Healthy Lifestyle
Symptoms A-Z
Diseases & Conditions A-Z
Tests & Procedures A-Z
Drugs & Supplements A-Z
Appointments
Patient & Visitor Guide
Billing & Insurance
Patient Online Services
DEPARTMENTS & CENTERS
Doctors & Medical Staff
Medical Departments & Centers
Research Centers & Programs
About Mayo Clinic
Contact Us
RESEARCH
Explore Research Labs
Find Clinical Trials
Research Faculty
Postdoctoral Fellowships
Discovery's Edge Magazine
Search Publications
Training Grant Positions
EDUCATION
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences
Mayo Clinic School of Medicine
Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development
Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education
Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences
Alumni Center
FOR MEDICAL PROFESSIONALS
Provider Relations
Online Services for Referring Physicians
Video Center
Publications
Continuing Medical Education
Mayo Medical Laboratories
PRODUCTS & SERVICES
Healthy Living Program
Sports Medicine
Books and more ...
Mayo Clinic Health Letter
Medical Products
Population Health and Wellness Programs
Medical Laboratory Services
Mayo Clinic Voice Apps
Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy linked below.

Terms and Conditions
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Reprint Permissions
A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research.

HONcode standard for trustworthy health We comply with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health information: verify here.
© 1998-2017 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.